A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again, I have remember’d me, thou’s hear our counsel. Thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age.
She’s not fourteen.
A fortnight and odd days.
Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.
Marry, that marry is the very theme I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married?
Well, think of marriage now: younger than you, Here in Verona, ladies of esteem, Are made already mothers. By my count I was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief; The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.
What say you, can you love the gentleman? This night you shall behold him at our feast; Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face, And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen. Examine every married lineament, And see how one another lends content; And what obscur’d in this fair volume lies, Find written in the margent of his eyes. This precious book of love, this unbound lover, To beautify him, only lacks a cover: The fish lives in the sea; and ’tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide. That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory, That in gold clasps locks in the golden story; So shall you share all that he doth possess, By having him, making yourself no less.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris’ love?
We follow thee. Juliet, the County stays.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother’s child! O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill’d Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true, For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. O cousin, cousin.
He is a kinsman to the Montague. Affection makes him false, he speaks not true. Some twenty of them fought in this black strife, And all those twenty could but kill one life. I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give; Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow; Tonight she’s mew’d up to her heaviness.
Ho, daughter, are you up?
Why, how now, Juliet?
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death? What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love, But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend Which you weep for.
Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death As that the villain lives which slaughter’d him.
That same villain Romeo.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banish’d runagate doth live, Shall give him such an unaccustom’d dram That he shall soon keep Tybalt company: And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man. But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child; One who to put thee from thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy, That thou expects not, nor I look’d not for.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn The gallant, young, and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church, Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands. Enter Capulet and Nurse.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks. I would the fool were married to her grave.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
You are too hot.
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word. Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
We shall be short in our provision, ’Tis now near night.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Good night. Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time; But I will watch you from such watching now.
What noise is here?
What is the matter?
O me, O me! My child, my only life. Revive, look up, or I will die with thee. Help, help! Call help. Enter Capulet.
Alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!
O woful time!
Accurs’d, unhappy, wretched, hateful day. Most miserable hour that e’er time saw In lasting labour of his pilgrimage. But one, poor one, one poor and loving child, But one thing to rejoice and solace in, And cruel death hath catch’d it from my sight.
O the people in the street cry Romeo, Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run With open outcry toward our monument.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell That warns my old age to a sepulchre. Enter Montague and others.