Is she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully seeks her own salvation?
How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence?
It must be _se offendendo_, it cannot be else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches. It is to act, to do, and to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.
Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he goes,—mark you that. But if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
Ay, marry, is’t, crowner’s quest law.
Why, there thou say’st. And the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.
He was the first that ever bore arms.
What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture? The Scripture says Adam digg’d. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself—
What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
I like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well. But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To’t again, come.
Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
To’t.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and when you are asked this question next, say ‘a grave-maker’. The houses he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor. In youth when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet; To contract, O, the time for, a, my behove, O methought there was nothing meet.
But age with his stealing steps Hath claw’d me in his clutch, And hath shipp’d me into the land, As if I had never been such.
A pickaxe and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding-sheet; O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.
Mine, sir. O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.
You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore ’tis not yours. For my part, I do not lie in’t, yet it is mine.
’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’t will away again from me to you.
For no man, sir.
For none neither.
One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.
Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to’t that day that our last King Hamlet o’ercame Fortinbras.
Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the very day that young Hamlet was born,—he that is mad, and sent into England.
Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there; or if he do not, it’s no great matter there.
’Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad as he.
Very strangely, they say.
Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
Faith, if he be not rotten before he die,—as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in,—he will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine year.
Why, sir, his hide is so tann’d with his trade that he will keep out water a great while. And your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. Here’s a skull now; this skull hath lain in the earth three-and-twenty years.
A whoreson, mad fellow’s it was. Whose do you think it was?
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! A pour’d a flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the King’s jester.
E’en that.